Concept: Pipelines and Command Lists (#714)
exercism/bash: concepts/pipelines/introduction.md

# Pipelines and Command Lists

> We have seen how to write simple commands, where the command is followed by arguments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have seen how to write simple commands, where a command is followed by arguments.
```

Now we will see how to make more complex commands by composing simple commands.

## Pipelines

This is one of the "killer features" of shell programming.
Pipelines allow you create sophisticated transformations on a stream of text.

To produce a sorted list of users:

```bash
cat /etc/passwd | cut -d : -f 1 | sort
```

The pipe symbol (`|`) connects the output of one command to the input of another.

> `cut` reads the output of `cat`, and `sort` reads the output of `cut`.

Reviewer: Do you want to take a step back and mention how many commands read from STDIN (and/or a file) and write to STDOUT? Introduce STDIN/STDOUT?

Author: Right, I'll do a "sneak preview" of I/O, with a promise of more to come in a later concept.

~~~~exercism/advanced

> * By default, each command in a pipeline runs in a separate subshell.

Reviewer: ... unless you `shopt -s lastpipe` ;)

Author: OK smartypants :P

  (A subshell is a child process that is a copy of the currently running shell.)

* All the commands in a subshell execute in parallel.

* There is a performance cost to running pipelines.
  If you find yourself with long pipelines of similar commands, consider combining them in a single command.

>   For example, pipelines using multiple instances of grep+cut+sed+awk+tr can be combined into a single awk command for efficiency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  For example, pipelines using multiple instances of `grep`, `cut`, `sed`, `awk`, and `tr` can generally be combined into a single `awk` command for efficiency.
```

* The exit status of a pipeline is the exit status of the last command in the pipeline.
  However, there is a shell setting that can control this.

>   The "pipefail" setting (enabled with `set -o pipefail`) will use the _**last** non-zero exit status_ of the pipeline's commands as the pipeline's exit status, unless all commands succeeded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The "pipefail" setting (enabled with `set -o pipefail`) will use the _**last** non-zero exit status_ of the commands in a pipeline as the pipeline's exit status, unless all commands succeeded.
```

~~~~

## Command Lists

A command list is a sequence of pipelines separated by `;` (or newline), `&&` or `||`.

> * `A ; B` is a command list where `B` executes after `A` has completed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `A; B` is a command list where `B` executes after `A` has completed.
```

* `A && B`, where `B` executes only if `A` succeeds (exits with status zero).
* `A || B`, where `B` executes only if `A` fails (exits with status non-zero).

> The exit status of a command list is the exit status of the last command that executes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The exit status of a command list is the exit status of the last command that was executed.
```

The `&&` and `||` operators can be chained so that the next command conditionally executes based on the status of the preceding commands.
For example

```bash
A && B && C && D || E
```

* B executes if A succeeds,
* C executes if A and B succeed,
* D executes if A and B and C succeed,
* E executes if **any** of A, B, C or D fails.

~~~~exercism/caution
Use these logical operators sparingly.
They can quickly lead to unreadable code, or logic that is hard to comprehend.

For example, do you think these are the same?

```bash
if A; then B; else C; fi
```

```bash
A && B || C
```

> The difference is: when does C execute?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They differ in when C is executed.
```

> * In the first snippet, the if statement, C will only execute if A fails.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* In the first snippet (the if statement), C will only execute if A fails.
```

* In the second snippet, C executes if A fails _or if A succeeds but B fails_!
~~~~

### Uses of Command Lists

Here are a couple of examples where command lists can simplify bash code.

#### Reading blocks of lines from a file

Suppose you have a data file that represents points of a triangle as the length of the three sides but each on a separate line.

```bash
$ cat triangle.dat
3
4
5
9
12
14
```

You can use a while loop where the condition is three separate read commands:

```bash
while read a && read b && read c; do
    if is_pythagorean "$a" "$b" "$c"; then
        echo "$a:$b:$c is pythagorean"
    else
        echo "$a:$b:$c is not pythagorean"
    fi
done < triangle.dat
```

Assuming `is_pythagorean` is a command that determines if the three sides satisfy the Pythagoran equation, the output would be

```none
3:4:5 is pythagorean
9:12:14 is not pythagorean
```

#### Assertions

Many programming languages have a form of assertion where an exception is thrown if some condition fails

```
assert(x == 5, "x must be 5");
```

We can use an OR operator in bash to simulate that function:

```bash
die () {
    echo "$*" >&2
    exit 1
}

> [[ $x -eq 5 ]] || die "x must be equal to 5"

Reviewer: Is there a reason you're using `[[` and not `((` for numbers?

Author: arithmetic is the next one.

Reviewer: Yup. But you're still using `[[` for numbers, which I usually tell people to avoid. Could this be a string operation instead?

Author: Yes of course. It's just example code here, I do a user/password thingy

[[ $y -gt 5 ]] || die "y must be greater than 5"
```

## Style Considerations

Long command lists become hard to read quite quickly.
Liberal use of newlines can help a lot.

> Here's an example: a word is added to an array if two conditions are met

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider this example where a word is added to an array if two conditions are met.
```

```bash
[[ "$word" != "$topic" ]] && [[ "$key" == "$(sorted "$topic")" ]] && anagrams+=("$candidate")
```

Bash allows you to add a newline after a pipe or a logical operator.

```bash
[[ "$word" != "$topic" ]] &&
[[ "$key" == "$(sorted "$topic")" ]] &&
anagrams+=("$candidate")
```

> But the operator kind of gets lost at the end of the line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the operator can be easy to miss at the end of the line.
```

Author: Thanks for this one particularly. I knew the original wasn't the right tone.

Using a _line continuation_ means you can put the operator first, which makes it more obvious that the list is being continued:

```bash
[[ "$word" != "$topic" ]] \
&& [[ "$key" == "$(sorted "$topic")" ]] \
&& anagrams+=("$candidate")
```

~~~~exercism/note

> A _line continuation_ is the two character sequence "backslash"+"newline".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A _line continuation_ is the two character sequence "backslash" and "newline" (`\` + `\n`).
```

~~~~

## Command Lists

A command list is a sequence of pipelines separated by `;` (or newline), `&&` or `||`.

* `A; B` is a command list where `B` executes after `A` has completed.
* `A && B`, where `B` executes only if `A` succeeds (exits with status zero).
* `A || B`, where `B` executes only if `A` fails (exits with status non-zero).

The exit status of a command list is the exit status of the last command that was executed.

The `&&` and `||` operators can be chained so that the next command conditionally executes based on the status of the preceding commands.
For example

```bash
A && B && C && D || E
```

* B executes if A succeeds,
* C executes if A and B succeed,
* D executes if A and B and C succeed,
* E executes if **any** of A, B, C or D fails.

~~~~exercism/caution
Use these logical operators sparingly.
They can quickly lead to unreadable code, or logic that is hard to comprehend.

For example, you may think these are the same:

```bash
if A; then B; else C; fi
```

```bash
A && B || C
```

> They difference is: when does C execute?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The difference is: when does C execute?
```

Now we will see how to make more complex commands by composing simple commands.

## I/O

Before we start, a quick intro to input/output.

Processes have "standard I/O channels".

* A process can consume _input_ on "stdin".
* A process can emit _output_ on "stdout".
* A process can emit _error output_ on "stderr".

The `tr` command is a very pure example of this.
All it does is read text from its stdin, perform character transliterations, and print the resulting text to stdout.

We will see more about manipulating stdio channels later in the syllabus.

## Pipelines

This is one of the "killer features" of shell programming.
Pipelines allow you create sophisticated transformations on a stream of text.

To produce a sorted list of users:

```bash
cat /etc/passwd | cut -d : -f 1 | sort
```

The pipe symbol (`|`) connects the output of one command to the input of another.
`cut` reads the output of `cat`, and `sort` reads the output of `cut`.

~~~~exercism/advanced
* By default, each command in a pipeline runs in a separate subshell.
  (A subshell is a child process that is a copy of the currently running shell.)

> * All the commands in a subshell execute in parallel.

Author: Oops, all the commands in a **pipeline** execute in parallel.

I can't find where in the manual this is stated, although I believe it to be true. I can just remove it.
